readme.md, before:

# H05D3A: Computer architectures

## Goal of these exercise sessions 

In these exercise sessions, you will develop a complete microprocessor in Verilog. You start by assembling the necessary components to a single cycle processor and run a simple program on it. Next, you will increase the performance, by pipelining the processor. The main objective of this lab session is ensuring the functionality of our CPU as well as to understand its performance and necessary hardware resources. The processor will be synthesized in a 32 nm CMOS technology using generic libraries from Synopsis using regular Vt Cells. The clock frequency used for synthesis is 10 MHz, which means a clock period equals to 100 ns. 

## information about the tools

In order to complete your assignment, you will work with a set of tools. These tools are set up for you, but they are also very typical tools used in industrial digital design. The performance of the processor will be evaluated through **cycle-accurate simulation** using NC Verilog. Through the use of **synthesis tools** from Design Vision, the hardware resources needed for its implementation will be evaluated.

### Project Workspace

To create your workspace you have two options:
1.	Fork the repository with the starting material from GitHub (see below) and use git as versioning tool of the development of the project (suggested).
2.	 Download from Toledo the file processor_design.zip located in the folder Exercise Sessions. Extract it to some location of your system. 
The folders that compose our project workspace are:
*	tools_scripts: Scripts for running the tools used during the exercises. 
*	RTL: All the Verilog files that define the logic of the processor.
*	SIM: Files for running the simulation of the HDL code.
    -	SIM/data: Subfolder that contains the assembly code to run.
*	SYNTHESIS: Files for running the synthesis of the processor.
For using the tools and completing the exercise sessions you need to access through SSH connection to a virtual workspace on the ESAT servers. Login details are available on the dedicated startup SSH guide.

If you are not familiar with SSH connections and/or git versioning tool, please check out the documents and guides provided for you in the course material.

### To run cycle accurate simulations (to check functional correctness)

<img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/KUL-CA-Exercise/CA_Exercise/main/.github/images/image001.png" style="float: right;" >

To run the simulation of the processor:

*	Run the tool script going to the folder tools_scripts. Run the command `source incisiv_15.20.058.rc`
*	Go to the folder SIM. Run the command `make nc_gui` through a terminal (Optionally run the command `make nc` to use the tool without graphical interface which checks the correctness of the program). This command will call all the hdl files declared in `SIM/files_verilog.f` and will execute the testbench `RTL/cpu_tb.v`. This testbench (1) declares an instance of the cpu  (2) loads the instruction memory from the file` SIM/data/imem_content.txt` (3) loads the data memory from the file `SIM/data/dmem_content.txt`  (4) Starts the execution of the instructions.
*	After running the command, the NC verilog graphical interface will open. In the left part of the window the whole hierarchy of the design could be found. With the objective of displaying the internal signals for debugging go to the target submodule and select it. Afterwards do right-click over the signals to display and select “Send to Waveform Window”. Finally run the simulation with the button: <img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/KUL-CA-Exercise/CA_Exercise/main/.github/images/image002.png">


### To run synthesis (for power and area estimates)

To synthesize your verilog code into a netlist which can be used for area and power simulations:
*	Run the tool script going to the folder `tools_scripts`. Run the command: `source synopsys_2017.09.rc`
*	Go to the folder `SYNTHESIS`. Run the synthesis through the command: `source synthesis.sh`
This command will load the libraries from the technology (standard cells, memory macros, etc) as well as the design constrains through the sdc file: `SYNTHESIS/design_constraints.sdc` (This file defines specifications from the designer such as the frequency, false paths, etc).   
The netlist obtained through this process could be found in the folder `SYNTHESIS/gate/cpu.v`.
The reports of area, power, resources and timing are generated in the folder `SYNTHESIS/rep`.

## Tasks to be Done by you in these Exercise sessions

*	The datapath as well as its submodules have been already implemented for you in Verilog. However, the functionality of the processor must be completed by carrying out the tasks described underneath. 
*	The assignments must be completed in groups of 2 people. 
*	After completing each one of the exercises the results must be shown to the TAs for its correspondent evaluation.
*	The code must be delivered to the TAs in the final session. 
*	Also, you will hand in a small report based on the questions you find on the last page. Together with the performance of your final processor, this counts for 2 points in the final H05d3A grade. **This report is handed in through Toledo. The deadline will be set and communicated to you.**

### 1 - Single cycle Processor with adder

Complete the internals of the control unit to handle the following instructions: (BEQ, JUMP, LW, SW, ADDI as well as R-type ALU instructions called ‘ ALU_R’). Set the outputs of the control unit correctly depending on the fetched instruction, ensure the correct datapath behavior.
- &rarr; For debugging purposes, you can use the test code simple_program contained in the folder SIM/data, containing all the supported instructions interleaved by NOP instructions. Next, the code “MULT1” executes the multiplication of 5 integers and sum all the results. Test this code to ensure that your design is correctly implemented. 
- &rarr; After obtaining a functional model run the synthesis.

### 2 - Single cycle Processor with multiplier

The processor completed in the last exercise is able to execute multiplications through sums and shifting since there is no hardware support to carry out the multiplication in one cycle. With the purpose of boosting performance, your task will be to add hardware support for multiplication and evaluating its impact on performance, area and timing. The processor must be able to process the multiplication instruction MULT. The format of the instruction is the following:

| [31:25] funct7 | [24:20] rs2 | [19:15] rs1 | [14:12] funct3 | [11:7] rd | [6:0] opcode |
| ------- | ----- | ----- | --- | ----- | ------- |
| 0000001 | XXXXX | XXXXX | 000 | XXXXX | 0110011 |

Three files might need to be modified for this purpose: `control.unit.v`,  `alu_control.v` and `alu.v`. To test the performance and correctness of your design, load the assembly test code “MULT2” which uses now the implemented MULT instruction to carry out the same 5 multiplications and sums of the testcode “MULT1”.   After updating your design, run the simulation and synthesis again.

*Is it necessary to modify the control unit for the insertion of the MULT instruction?*

### 3 - Pipelined Processor

In this part of the session we will modify our processor to convert it to a pipelined implementation.  For the following exercises assume data and control hazards are solved by NOP instructions.
For a processor with 5 pipelined stages (Instruction Fetch (IF), Instruction Decode (ID), Execute (EXE), Memory (MEM) and Write Back (WB)), identify which hardware resources belong to each of the mentioned stages, and which signals should go from stage to stage. Try to match the HDL code with the Architecture, and complete the tables underneath (you can complete directly in the `readme.md` file if you want).

|                    | IF | ID | EXE | MEM | WB |
| ------------------ | -- | -- | --- | --- | -- |
| Datapath Resources |    |    |     |     |    |
|                    |    |    |     |     |    |


|         | IF &rarr; ID | ID &rarr; EXE | EXE &rarr; MEM | MEM &rarr; WB |
| ------- | ------------ | ------------- | -------------- | ------------- |
| Signals |              |               |                |               |
|         |              |               |                |               |

Insert the pipelined registers where necessary, using the module `reg_arstn_en`. 

``` verilog
reg_arstn_en#(
    .DATA_W(16)
) signal_pipe_ID_EX( 
      .clk   (clk       ),
      .arst_n(arst_n    ),
      .din   (signal_IF  ),
      .en    (enable    ),
      .dout  (signal_ID)
   );
```
This module implements a register with variable width, which is set through the parameter DATA_W. See the inset on the right for an example for such a pipelined register between the Fetching (signals signal_IF) and Decode stage (signal_ID). Connect the enable signal of the pipelined registers to the global enable signal called enable. After updating your design, run the test code MULT2 and ensure the correct functionality. Finally, run the synthesis scripts.

### 4 - Pipelined Processor with Data-Hazard Resolution
Since the pipelined processor implemented does not have support for handling data hazards, the execution of more complex code containing branches or data dependencies would not work properly.  Add hardware support for forwarding and stalling in order to achieve this functionality. Run synthesis, and compare the results with previous implementations.  After updating your design, run the test code MULT3 and ensure the correct functionality. Finally, run the synthesis scripts

### 5 - Advanced Acceleration

TODO

Commit message:

added matmul exercise to readme

readme.md, after:

# H05D3A: Computer architectures

## Goal of these exercise sessions 

In these exercise sessions, you will develop a complete microprocessor in Verilog. You start by assembling the necessary components to a single cycle processor and run a simple program on it. Next, you will increase the performance, by pipelining the processor. The main objective of this lab session is ensuring the functionality of our CPU as well as to understand its performance and necessary hardware resources. The processor will be synthesized in a 32 nm CMOS technology using generic libraries from Synopsis using regular Vt Cells. The clock frequency used for synthesis is 10 MHz, which means a clock period equals to 100 ns. 

## information about the tools

In order to complete your assignment, you will work with a set of tools. These tools are set up for you, but they are also very typical tools used in industrial digital design. The performance of the processor will be evaluated through **cycle-accurate simulation** using NC Verilog. Through the use of **synthesis tools** from Design Vision, the hardware resources needed for its implementation will be evaluated.

### Project Workspace

To create your workspace you have two options:
1.	Fork the repository with the starting material from GitHub (see below) and use git as versioning tool of the development of the project (suggested).
2.	 Download from Toledo the file processor_design.zip located in the folder Exercise Sessions. Extract it to some location of your system. 
The folders that compose our project workspace are:
*	tools_scripts: Scripts for running the tools used during the exercises. 
*	RTL: All the Verilog files that define the logic of the processor.
*	SIM: Files for running the simulation of the HDL code.
    -	SIM/data: Subfolder that contains the assembly code to run.
*	SYNTHESIS: Files for running the synthesis of the processor.
For using the tools and completing the exercise sessions you need to access through SSH connection to a virtual workspace on the ESAT servers. Login details are available on the dedicated startup SSH guide.

If you are not familiar with SSH connections and/or git versioning tool, please check out the documents and guides provided for you in the course material.

### To run cycle accurate simulations (to check functional correctness)

<img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/KUL-CA-Exercise/CA_Exercise/main/.github/images/image001.png" style="float: right;" >

To run the simulation of the processor:

*	Run the tool script going to the folder tools_scripts. Run the command `source incisiv_15.20.058.rc`
*	Go to the folder SIM. Run the command `make nc_gui` through a terminal (Optionally run the command `make nc` to use the tool without graphical interface which checks the correctness of the program). This command will call all the hdl files declared in `SIM/files_verilog.f` and will execute the testbench `RTL/cpu_tb.v`. This testbench (1) declares an instance of the cpu  (2) loads the instruction memory from the file` SIM/data/imem_content.txt` (3) loads the data memory from the file `SIM/data/dmem_content.txt`  (4) Starts the execution of the instructions.
*	After running the command, the NC verilog graphical interface will open. In the left part of the window the whole hierarchy of the design could be found. With the objective of displaying the internal signals for debugging go to the target submodule and select it. Afterwards do right-click over the signals to display and select “Send to Waveform Window”. Finally run the simulation with the button: <img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/KUL-CA-Exercise/CA_Exercise/main/.github/images/image002.png">


### To run synthesis (for power and area estimates)

To synthesize your verilog code into a netlist which can be used for area and power simulations:
*	Run the tool script going to the folder `tools_scripts`. Run the command: `source synopsys_2017.09.rc`
*	Go to the folder `SYNTHESIS`. Run the synthesis through the command: `source synthesis.sh`
This command will load the libraries from the technology (standard cells, memory macros, etc) as well as the design constrains through the sdc file: `SYNTHESIS/design_constraints.sdc` (This file defines specifications from the designer such as the frequency, false paths, etc).   
The netlist obtained through this process could be found in the folder `SYNTHESIS/gate/cpu.v`.
The reports of area, power, resources and timing are generated in the folder `SYNTHESIS/rep`.

## Tasks to be Done by you in these Exercise sessions

*	The datapath as well as its submodules have been already implemented for you in Verilog. However, the functionality of the processor must be completed by carrying out the tasks described underneath. 
*	The assignments must be completed in groups of 2 people. 
*	After completing each one of the exercises the results must be shown to the TAs for its correspondent evaluation.
*	The code must be delivered to the TAs in the final session. 
*	Also, you will hand in a small report based on the questions you find on the last page. Together with the performance of your final processor, this counts for 2 points in the final H05d3A grade. **This report is handed in through Toledo. The deadline will be set and communicated to you.**

### 1 - Single cycle Processor with adder

Complete the internals of the control unit to handle the following instructions: (BEQ, JUMP, LW, SW, ADDI as well as R-type ALU instructions called ‘ ALU_R’). Set the outputs of the control unit correctly depending on the fetched instruction, ensure the correct datapath behavior.
- &rarr; For debugging purposes, you can use the test code simple_program contained in the folder SIM/data, containing all the supported instructions interleaved by NOP instructions. Next, the code “MULT1” executes the multiplication of 5 integers and sum all the results. Test this code to ensure that your design is correctly implemented. 
- &rarr; After obtaining a functional model run the synthesis.

### 2 - Single cycle Processor with multiplier

The processor completed in the last exercise is able to execute multiplications through sums and shifting since there is no hardware support to carry out the multiplication in one cycle. With the purpose of boosting performance, your task will be to add hardware support for multiplication and evaluating its impact on performance, area and timing. The processor must be able to process the multiplication instruction MULT. The format of the instruction is the following:

| [31:25] funct7 | [24:20] rs2 | [19:15] rs1 | [14:12] funct3 | [11:7] rd | [6:0] opcode |
| ------- | ----- | ----- | --- | ----- | ------- |
| 0000001 | XXXXX | XXXXX | 000 | XXXXX | 0110011 |

Three files might need to be modified for this purpose: `control.unit.v`,  `alu_control.v` and `alu.v`. To test the performance and correctness of your design, load the assembly test code “MULT2” which uses now the implemented MULT instruction to carry out the same 5 multiplications and sums of the testcode “MULT1”.   After updating your design, run the simulation and synthesis again.

*Is it necessary to modify the control unit for the insertion of the MULT instruction?*

### 3 - Pipelined Processor

In this part of the session we will modify our processor to convert it to a pipelined implementation.  For the following exercises assume data and control hazards are solved by NOP instructions.
For a processor with 5 pipelined stages (Instruction Fetch (IF), Instruction Decode (ID), Execute (EXE), Memory (MEM) and Write Back (WB)), identify which hardware resources belong to each of the mentioned stages, and which signals should go from stage to stage. Try to match the HDL code with the Architecture, and complete the tables underneath (you can complete directly in the `readme.md` file if you want).

|                    | IF | ID | EXE | MEM | WB |
| ------------------ | -- | -- | --- | --- | -- |
| Datapath Resources |    |    |     |     |    |
|                    |    |    |     |     |    |


|         | IF &rarr; ID | ID &rarr; EXE | EXE &rarr; MEM | MEM &rarr; WB |
| ------- | ------------ | ------------- | -------------- | ------------- |
| Signals |              |               |                |               |
|         |              |               |                |               |

Insert the pipelined registers where necessary, using the module `reg_arstn_en`. 

``` verilog
reg_arstn_en#(
    .DATA_W(16)
) signal_pipe_ID_EX( 
      .clk   (clk       ),
      .arst_n(arst_n    ),
      .din   (signal_IF  ),
      .en    (enable    ),
      .dout  (signal_ID)
   );
```
This module implements a register with variable width, which is set through the parameter DATA_W. See the inset on the right for an example for such a pipelined register between the Fetching (signals signal_IF) and Decode stage (signal_ID). Connect the enable signal of the pipelined registers to the global enable signal called enable. After updating your design, run the test code MULT2 and ensure the correct functionality. Finally, run the synthesis scripts.

### 4 - Pipelined Processor with Data-Hazard Resolution
Since the pipelined processor implemented does not have support for handling data hazards, the execution of more complex code containing branches or data dependencies would not work properly.  Add hardware support for forwarding and stalling in order to achieve this functionality. Run synthesis, and compare the results with previous implementations.  After updating your design, run the test code MULT3 and ensure the correct functionality. Finally, run the synthesis scripts

### 5 - Advanced Acceleration
This last exercise aims at demonstrating how an architecture can leverage the structure of a program to speed up its execution. To do so, your task for this exercise will be to accelerate the execution of the following matrix-matrix multiplication:

$$
O = I \cdot W = 
\left(\begin{array}{ccccc} 
20 & 19 & 18 & 17 & 16 \\
15 & 14 & 13 & 12 & 11 \\
10 &  9 &  8 &  7 &  6 \\
 5 &  5 &  3 &  2 &  1 
\end{array}\right)
\left(\begin{array}{ccc} 
  1 &  2 &  3 \\
  4 &  5 &  6 \\
  7 &  8 &  9 \\
 10 & 11 & 12 \\
 14 & 15 & 16
\end{array}\right)
=
\left(

\begin{matrix}
    600 &   690 &  780 \\
    250 &   290 &  330 \\
    75  &   90  &  105 \\
\end{matrix}

\right)
$$ 

For this exercise, a baseline program (MULT4) is provided to execute this matrix multiplication. This program operates on two matrices I and W stored in row-major order and column-major order, respectively, and appends the result O in row-major order after the operand matrices in the data memory space. 
Using your pipelined implementation as a basis, elaborate a solution to accelerate the executions of matrix multiplications (hints: Patterson-Hennessy Section 4.8 to 4.10, RISC-V specification chapter 17). Simulate and synthesize your design.
